---
layout: post
title: Using rsync with an AWS EC2 instance and an SSH key
comments: true
slug: rsync-aws-ec2-ssh-pem
summary: "Using rsync with EC2 and subtleties of the trailing slash"
date: "2019-01-20"
tags: [rsync, linux, aws, ssh]
---

`rsync` is an extremely useful utility for synchronizing files between remote computers. It is the primary tool I use to deploy code to targets such as servers, Raspberry Pies, or other remote Linux machines. In this post, I am going to show the basic `rsync` usage examples, break down the meaning of the widely-used options of the `rsync` command, and demonstrate the principles of deployment of files to an AWS EC2 instance using `rsync` with an SSH key. 

Let's say you are working on a project on your local machine that is stored in directory `/Users/michaelscott/my_project`. You want to transmit this directory to a remote machine, say into `/home/michaelscott/my_project`. The transmission is done as follows: 

```bash
# in /Users/michaelscott

rsync -avz my_project/ michaelscott@$REMOTE_HOSTNAME:/home/michaelscott/my_project
```

After you have made additional changes on the local machine, running the same command will synchronize the remote files with only the updated files transmitted.

In this example, the top-level directory names of both the source and the destination is the same. It doesn't have to be like that. You would get the same result with such command:

```bash
rsync -avz my_project/ michaelscott@$REMOTE_HOSTNAME:/home/michaelscott/my_code
```

It is very **important** to notice the **trailing slash** in the source directory. If it is present, all files of the source `my_project` will be copied to the destination `my_code`. However, if it is absent, the directory `my_code/my_project` will be created, and all the files will be transmitted there. 

If your curent directory on the local machine is `/Users/michaelscott/my_project`, you can invoke `rsync` like this to get the result identical to the first example:

```bash
rsync -avz * michaelscott@$REMOTE_HOSTNAME:/home/michaelscott/my_project
```

If you look at the documentation via `man rsync`, the classic `-avz` option boils down to the following directives:

* `-a` enables recursion and preserves elements such as symbolic links, devices, attributes, permissions, ownerships
* `-v` enables verbosity
* `-z` compresses the files being transmitted

When dealing with an AWS instance, one requires a private key (`pem`-file) that is associated with the given instance in order to authencicate. Let's say your key is stored as `~/.ssh/aws_key.pem`. Then you would use the following command:

```bash
rsync -avze "ssh -i ~/.ssh/aws_key.pem" my_project/ $EC2_USER@$EC2_HOSTNAME:/home/$EC2_USER/my_project
```

Notice the additional `-e` option and the `"ssh -i ..."` string. The latter is basically how you would connect to a remote server via `ssh` when the name of your private key is othen than the default `~/.ssh/id_rsa`:

```bash
ssh -i ~/.ssh/aws_key.pem $EC2_USER@$EC2_HOSTNAME
```

The `-e` option of `rsync` specifies the remote shell to be used for transmission. In our case, it is done via the cusom SSH tunnel. 

You my refer to additional examples of using rsync in [this](https://www.tecmint.com/rsync-local-remote-file-synchronization-commands/) blog post at TecMint. 

