content/post/2021-04-17-build-cpp-code-from-windows-terminal.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Building C++ code from command line on Windows
comments: true
slug: build-cpp-code-from-windows-terminal
date: "2021-04-17"
tags: [c++, windows]
---

After many years of working exclusively in Unix environments, Windows experience appears daunting, in particular when it comes doing stuff in terminal. I have heard a lot of about the power of PowerShell, but I have never had enough motivation to explore it -- I sticked to the familar Bash on Mac and Linux for most of my work. However, I was always interested in mastering the task of building C++ code using the native compiler on Windows (Visual C++) without using any GUI tools. 

Most of the tutorials on the Web, though, always describe the workflow based on CMake GUI as the first step to generate a Visual Studio project, and then using the Visual Studio itself to build the targets. Purely command line approach seemed very arcane to me. In this post, I would like to systematize some of the knowledge I gained while exploring terminal-based capabilities of Visual C++ and the associated workflow on a Windows machine. 

The official "entry point" to being able to use Visual Studio's command line tools is to launch the corresponding shortcut from the start menu:

```
Start -> 
    Programs -> 
        Visual Studio 2019 -> 
            Visual Studio Tools -> 
                x64 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS 2019
```

TODO.

Commit message:

cl example and vcvars64.bat invokation

content/post/2021-04-17-build-cpp-code-from-windows-terminal.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Building C++ code from command line on Windows
comments: true
slug: build-cpp-code-from-windows-terminal
date: "2021-04-17"
tags: [c++, windows]
---

After many years of working exclusively in Unix environments, Windows experience appears daunting, in particular when it comes doing stuff in terminal. I have heard a lot of about the power of PowerShell, but I have never had enough motivation to explore it -- I sticked to the familar Bash on Mac and Linux for most of my work. However, I was always interested in mastering the task of building C++ code using the native compiler on Windows (Visual C++) without using any GUI tools. 

Most of the tutorials on the Web, though, always describe the workflow based on CMake GUI as the first step to generate a Visual Studio project, and then using the Visual Studio itself to build the targets. Purely command line approach seemed very arcane to me. In this post, I would like to systematize some of the knowledge I gained while exploring terminal-based capabilities of Visual C++ and the associated workflow on a Windows machine. 

The official "entry point" to being able to use Visual Studio's command line tools is to launch the corresponding shortcut from the start menu:

```
Start -> 
    Programs -> 
        Visual Studio 2019 -> 
            Visual Studio Tools -> 
                x64 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS 2019
```

It will enable the good old `cmd.exe` with enabled set of the necessary environment variables and access to the compiler/linker executable `cl.exe`. It can be further invoked as follows (imagine we are in the `build` directory, which is on the same level as `src` and `include`):

```
cl ..\src\app.cpp ..\src\library.cpp /I ..\include
```

Here we are providing a list of source files to compile and link, along with the directory when headers are located (following the `/I` option). This example command will generate two object files per each C++ source (`app.obj`, `library.obj`), along with one executable (`app.exe`) corresponding to the source file containing the `main` entry point (`app.cpp`).

How to activate the compiler command prompt from a script rather than by pointing and clicking? If you look at the details of the mentioned start menu shortcut, it points to a batch script `vcvars64.bat` that does all the work setting up the environment. We can invoke this script from our own batch script as follows:

```bat
if not defined DevEnvDir (
    call "C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvars64.bat"
)
```

The `if`-block, checking whether one of the required environment variables has been defined, is important in case your scipt would be invoked more than once.
